Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Dr Mia Massimi. She
is Professor of Philosophy of Science in the Department of
Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, affiliated with the
Higgs Center for Theoretical Physics. She works in the
area of history and Philosophy of Science with the focus
on the physical sciences. And today we are focusing
on her book Perspective of Realism, which by the
way, just recently won the 2023 Lacas awards.
So Dr Massimi, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone. Thank you so much
for having me Ricardo to be here. OK.
So to get into the book, I would like
to start by asking you this. So what is
realism in science? And by the way, uh
when, when I mean, realism is, are
there different kinds of realism or not? Sure.
Yeah. So um what we call realism in philosophy
of science is really um a broad um family of
views um that normally are characterized by um series of
commitments um that um are distinctive of what we would
like to think of a realist position. Now,
uh what those commitments are obviously um are fairly well
understood, but also change in a very subtle way
depending on which specific variety of realism one is willing
to subscribe to. Um So I would say that
what defines realism are two main commitments. Uh One
is the idea that there is uh uh uh uh
some relationship between science and um nature that is usually
captured by the notion of truth. Um And the
other is that there has to be some kind of
representational relation between how science and scientific theory, scientific
models relate to the target system. So if you
ask me, I would say um realism is defined
by those two broad notions of truth and representation.
Now, obviously, we may disagree about what we
mean by truth. We may disagree slightly about what
we mean by representation, how models represent reality.
Um So, depending on how different philosophers characterize those
notions, you may get different varieties of realism.
Um So, over really the past uh 40 50
years, there has been a proliferation of views that
call themselves or style themselves as realist view. Um
Some of them are um redefining some of those notions
of truth. So you have variety of pragmatic realism
or internal realism. Um Others are rethinking the exact
nature of the relationship between science and nature um uh
in terms of representation. So you have varieties of
selective realism, for example, that um endorse the
presentational commitment, but they would be selective about which
aspects of reality the model is committed to represent.
So very broadly, truth and representation are the two
key commitments. Uh And within the broad umbrella,
there is a, a full spectrum of views that
may slightly differ in how they understand those two notions
and how those two notions enter into um our way
of thinking about science and, and reality and related
to that, what would an anti realist stance in
science entail? So, um going back to this
idea that, you know, truth and representations are
some of the two key commitments. Um uh anti
realist view views and plural can be characterized by uh
playing down some of those um notions. So for
example, you find the varieties of instrumentalist views,
they are anti realist views because they are not committed
to the notion that um uh truth is any important
element in the way in which we think about the
relation between science and reality. Um You get varieties
of constructivism um that likewise uh would challenge the idea
that uh representation really plays an important role in how
models latch onto, onto the world on the realities
. Um So there's a broad spectrum of views really
going back to um 1980 the scientific image of Basman
Pras. And um that has been a landmark book
for a constructive empiricism. Um It's a classic example
of an anterial view where um the notion of truth
is replaced by notion of empirical adequacy, for example
. So according to a fra and die of science
is not to deliver um theories, they are approximately
true but to deliver theories, they are pi adequate
. Um two more recently varieties of epistemological constructivism.
So, um Mike Boone um building on the process
and defense form a form of constructivism and um how
she conceptualizes the relationship between models and reality. Um
So this is just an example, but obviously the
family is much broader than that. And what is
a scientific perspective? Um So it's a great question
, what is STV perspective? So the term um
has a bit of an history. Um The way
I've been using it in my book um really has
a um a predecessor. The closest predecessor is in
Ron's uh book on scientific perspective is uh the way
Ron Giri originally defined the notion of a scientific perspective
was really in analogy uh with Thomas Coon's notion of
a disciplinary matrix. So disciplinary matrix is a um
a slightly more refined notion of uh probably the more
familiar notion of S and TV paradigm um in the
sense that it indicates uh a family of um practices
and commitments that particular community has at a particular historical
time. The way in which Rangiri originally defined the
Oslo scientific perspective in, in, in the book
was really in terms of families or models. So
Rangiri was building on a long standing tradition, going
back to Patrick Sap in the 19 sixties onwards,
um whereby uh we need to think of scientific theories
as, as families or models. Uh starting with
high level models, uh representational models, going all
the way down to um models of the experiment,
data model and so forth. What I do in
the book is to slightly move away from Maroni's definition
. Um Because I would like to think of a
scientific perspective as something broader than just the family of
models. So for me, a scientific perspective is
the historically and culturally situated practice of particular communities,
a particular historical time. And I understand really this
notion of practice in a very, very broad sense
um um to include varieties of knowledge that um may
not necessarily have well defined formalized modeling practices. Um
So broadly speaking, a scientific perspective is a,
is a historically situated practice of a community. And
um here I borrow on the literature in epistemology.
Um there's been again, a very important literature on
perspective is coming from epistemology and Aaron Sosa in particular
knowledge in perspective uh book uh from which I'm drawing
in thinking that really what SN TV perspective does is
not just to um advance um a series of claims
of knowledge, but also provide the um experimental theoretical
and technological tools for reliably making those claims of knowledge
as well as providing um methodological and epistemic principles that
can justify the reliability of um of our uh uh
uh uh practices for making those claims of knowledge.
So it's kind of a a three fold distinction between
the body of claims of knowledge, the experimental theoretical
conceptual tools to reliably make them and the methodological epistemic
principle that justify the reliability of those uh of those
tools. And that's the, the, the very
broad way in which I've been using the term in
the book. And what about a perspective of realism
? What does it mean exactly? And what flavor
of realism applies to it? So, um yeah
, that's a great question. Going back to the
original question about varieties of realism and family of realism
. Um I'd like to think of prospect our realism
as a view that is committed to the notion of
truth as correspondence and the idea that um our theories
, our models especially uh represent reality. So it's
a realist view. But the way I present the
view in the book is that it, it's not
a metaphysics first uh view about realism. So very
often what you find is that realism is defined by
uh metaphysics first approaches. So if someone declared themselves
a realist, what they really mean is that they
are committed to spelling out to what the metaphysical building
blocks of nature are or they are committed to um
tell a story about uh what the metaphysical foundations of
reality are. And the metaphysical story typically involves um
different flavors of metaphysics. So some people are committed
to natural properties others are committed to the there are
dispositions um or other people believe in causal powers.
Um per the realism is not a metaphysics first approach
in the sense that although there is a metaphysical part
, uh which is the second part of the book
, um the primary aim is really um trying to
uh uh in a way show how that metaphysical commitment
is really downstream to an epistemological project. So what
really matters to me is to trying to understand how
we produce reliable knowledge over time and how a plurality
of historical and cultural situated perspectives um are able to
uh deliver that reliable knowledge over time. So um
I see realism not so much as uh um an
exercise in trying to uh unveil the metaphysical building block
of nature, but I see metaphysics as the downstream
outcome of how we tell a story about how we
produce reliable knowledge over time. So there is a
metaphysical part. So ultimately, spec of realism is
realism about phenomena about modally robust phenomenon. And that
obviously involves really finding the very notion of phenomena that
has a long philosophical history. And it's, it's
, it's part of what they're doing in the second
part of the book. So if you ask me
, what kind of flavor is perspective, a realism
, it's really realism about moderate robust phenomena. Um
But as I said, I see that metaphysical commitment
as, as the outcome of uh um uh a
more important exercise, which is trying to understand how
um different communities over time and culture produce reliable knowledge
over time. But then where is, where exactly
is the perspective, all nature in scientific representation?
So, yeah, what that perspective is enters into
the story of how we produce reliable knowledge, right
? So um I can think of a plurality of
communities that are historical and cultural situated, different historical
periods, different cultures and so forth. Can we
tell a story about how that knowledge is produced a
across these different communities? And how is that story
going to look like? Um So one thing I
definitely wanted to do in the book is to avoid
any um standard template that you find in the literature
on realism about realism of being some kind of convergence
to a reality that um in a way we all
agree upon. Um There is no convergence in perspective
of realism. Um The way I use often this
metaphor in the book taken for um the, the
o Borges at the Garden of Forking Path, they
are uh producing knowledge is a bit like going through
a garden of forking path and kind of zigzagging where
at each juncture, we have to make a choice
about which path we want to go down. So
there is no uh or underlying picture, the realism
is a convergence to because really it's a realism about
phenomena, there's no realism about any fundamental metaphysical reality
, as I said, the cause of powers,
dispositional essence is that we want to call it.
Um So those phenomena are encountered by different communities across
different periods and across different cultures um in a reliable
way or in a way that we are able to
uh uh to see how their situated practices intersect with
one another. So this is where the perspective that
comes in, right? Because traditionally, um the
very idea that the starting point of conversations about realism
um is, is, is, is is human
beings in their plurality and historically and cultural situated,
this has appeared to be a stumbling block to any
realist project. How could one ever possibly defend realism
, especially about science? Once we take really seriously
that there is a plurality of um historically situated communities
and their culture. So that was the starting point
of my um kind of journey uh for the book
. Um I went back to the notion of representation
. I said at the beginning through the representations are
the two key commitment of any realist view. And
I wanted to understand what makes some representations pers respectable
and whether there is a way of reconciling the perspective
of representation with realism. Um So at the very
beginning of the book, I go back to the
analogy between art and science and that has been well
explored since the time of, well, it's a
long story, long tradition really. Uh but more
recently, Basra and 2008 book on a scientific representation
, paradoxes of perspectives has been a very influential uh
book for uh for my own personal journey, but
also Kathrine Elgin uh 2017 book. Uh True Enough
, uh is also very important for discussing the perspective
nature of representation. And so really thinking about the
analogy between art and science, what makes some representation
perspect? Traditionally, we tend to think of that
uh question in terms of the representation is situated is
from a particular vantage point. So um a drawing
, a perspective drawing is what makes the drawing perspective
is that the scene is painted from a particular angle
. And obviously, the angle means that there are
other aspects of the scene that we can't really see
uh from that particular angle. So there is an
element of lusion and there is what Vansen called um
a horizon of alternatives. We could have chosen to
represent the scene from different angles and we could have
chosen to represent the object with different attributes. Um
So the story I turn in chapter two and three
of the book, which is really the beginning of
the of the book is that very often that specific
way of thinking about perspective of representation um has been
um regarded as a as a, as a difficulty
for any realism or a realist project. Um Precisely
because if the representation is situated is from a particular
angle, how can we ever be in a position
of saying what the real nature of the object is
, our knowledge is always partially occluded and, and
, and, and not complete. Um So the
story I tell is that, well, actually,
if you look at the nature of perspective and drawing
in art, um there are two ways of thinking
about perspective, um a representation is perspective, not
only because it's drawn from a particular angle, but
because it's also drawn towards one or more vantage point
. Actually, technically, this is the definition of
a perspect uh representation that um there is one or
more vantage point towards which lines converge. And that's
what creates the optical illusion that you can see a
three dimensional space on what effectively is a two dimensional
canvas. Um And, and so I play with
that metaphor in art to say, well, really
, those are two aspects of the same coin really
, you know, you the representation is perspect as
drawn from a particular vantage point only in so far
as there is one or more vantage points that allows
us to create this, this these windows of reality
, uh this, this three dimensional space emerging out
of a two dimensional canvas. And so that's my
entry point for the idea that there is a way
of telling a story about realism starting with the situated
nature of the representation. So tell us now about
the notion of pluralism. Where is it and how
does it apply to science? Yeah. So pluralism
is really uh again, a big family of views
. Uh I'm drawing really here on a long standing
tradition that has emphasized the importance of pluralism in science
. Um explanatory pluralism and methodological pluralism uh tradition.
Going back to Ellen Longino and uh Carol, a
fair and Miriam Solomon and Sandra Mitchell, integrity,
pluralism. Obviously, John Dupre promiscuous realism and many
, many, many others. Um the kind of
pluralism um that matters to my story is again,
perspect about pluralism is pluralism of perspectives as I have
defined it. Uh So my emphasis is not so
much on um explanatory methodological or ontological pluralism. It's
really pluralism about uh uh historically, cult is the
practices. It's, it's a fact that science is
the outcome of this plurality of perspectives and communities that
have endorsed different practices. Um And then obviously,
then the question becomes OK. Um As I was
just saying with the problem of perspective or representation is
pers sorry, representation from a point of view,
representation uh uh towards one or more vantage point,
the question is OK, if you take the pluralism
as a fact about science, what kind of uh
realism emerges out of that, can we even talk
about realism or should we just say that we are
um confined to a plurality of um ways of knowing
they are distinctive of different communities and their practices?
Um But we can't really attempt to tell a story
about science and scientific knowledge and, and realism about
science and the best that we can do is this
plurality of scientific practices. So, what I do
in the book is to say, no, no
, no. We, we can take the pluralism
, perspect of pluralism as a starting point. It's
a fact about science. The science is produced in
that way. But that doesn't mean that we need
to end up with some kind of instrumentalist or anti
realist view. There's still a way of defending realism
in science. Um starting with perspect about pluralism.
Mhm And so another thing that you tackle in your
book is the problem of inconsistent model. So what
is that problem really about and can perspective is help
us tackle it? Yeah. So kind of zooming
into uh this problem of how to reconcile um Perspect
about pluralism as pluralism of perspectives and, and realism
. The problem in consistent models uh is, is
, is one of, is one of the major
problem for any perspective is um because this is where
we the pluralism um appears to be somehow at odds
with any realist claim. Um So it's a problem
that was really brought to the general attention um maybe
13 years ago uh roughly uh by uh Mary Morrison
um in a, in a beautiful paper where she
discusses the plurality of models in some areas of science
. So she says, well, look at nuclear
physics, right? Um So the areas of science
where there is one model, we all agree more
or less that uh you know, it is the
um best model to describe some kind of phenomena.
But there are other areas where there seems to be
a pluralism, a kind of endemic pluralism and as
, as pluralism of models. So the example of
Morrison is that if you look at nuclear physics,
and if you ask the question about what is the
atomic nucleus, um you find different answers to the
question depending on whether we are studying a nuclear fission
. In which case, we represent the nucleus as
if it was a liquid of incompressible nuclear fluid.
Uh But if we are studying um stellar nucleus synthesis
, we use different families of models, the cluster
model whereby the atomic nucleus is represented as a tetrahedron
with a particular structures of problems and neutrons. And
obviously, if we're studying other phenomena in high energy
physics, we use yet another class of models.
We use the quark models to describe what happens when
we smash protons to say at LHC. So Morrison
Point was, well, if we have this pluralism
of models, does it even make sense to ask
what is the atomic nucleus? I mean, w
where is the realism there? Right? I mean
, we have different stories about what the nucleus is
. Um is there one which is the best one
? And if, if there is, then what
about the others? Isn't it better to adopt some
kind of instrumental is um perspective is, has often
been accused of being a form of instrumental is so
um Morrison uh argument in that paper that has also
been rested by other philosophers like an Chakravorti, for
example, in um in, in, in,
in, in his book on um the the kind
of metaphysics of nature is that very often perspective is
, doesn't live up to the promise of realism because
it looks like uh what we really mean by perspective
is is the representation is drawn from a particular point
of view. So if you look at the nucleus
from the point of view of um fission, then
it looks like a liquid drop. But if you
look at the nucleus from the point of view of
stellar nucleus synthesis, then it looks like a tetrad
. And I think it's that way of thinking about
perspective is that has really um meant that perspective is
for a long time as has been regarded as kind
of no much for realism. Um So I tackled
the problem of inconsistent models in chapter three of the
book. And um I show that the problem is
not really a problem for perspective is in so far
as we are clear about um some hidden assumptions that
seems to be creeping into the argument. And so
some of those assumptions are uh in my view are
, are really um kind of very demanding and unduly
stringent realist assumption that seems to assume that models represent
by mapping 1 to 1 aspects of the model with
aspects of the target system. And that seems to
understand the notion of truth going back to representation of
truth in terms of uh truth maker. So there
has to be a ontological state of affairs in terms
of ascription of essential properties to particular that make some
claims of knowledge true. And now if one endorses
that view about truth, the truth makers and representation
as mapping, I think Morrison has a point that
this plurality of model seems to be a problem for
, for realism, we can't think of the nucleus
as having inconsistent or incompatible essential properties. Um But
what I do in chapter three of the book is
to resist that assumption and saying, uh why,
why do we need to buy into representation as mapping
or what do we need to buy into truth as
truth maker? Maybe there is a different way of
thinking about what models do and how they represent from
a perspective or point of view that doesn't necessarily land
us into this um uh quo of inconsistent essential properties
ascribed to the same target system. And so it's
a very important problem because it's really um the starting
point of a way of reconciling realism or perspective is
and uh related to perspective modeling and perspective of models
. Um What do you mean by them being blueprints
on reality as you say in the book? And
uh perhaps related to these, how do the concepts
of conceivability and possibility enter into it. Yeah.
So um what I do from chapter four or five
onwards is to spell out the positive story, right
? And not just to say, we need to
resist all this assumption and duly stringent assumption. So
um a different way of thinking about what models do
is to tell a different story about how to represent
their target system without ascribing essential properties to the target
system. So in that context that develop the view
that models really are inferential blueprints, so they are
blueprints that allows different communities. And again, think
of a plurality of historical and cultural situated communities to
draw inferences about relevant model, robust phenomena from a
plurality of data set. So what the model does
is not so much mapping 1 to 1 aspects of
the model and aspects of reality. I think we
have been very often in philosophy, science, we
have this picture that models represent. But as if
really the primary function of the model was to mirror
a map onto the target system, right? But
that idea seems very counterintuitive to me even I mean
, think of well established model like the DN model
of the nucleus, right. I mean, we
don't, we don't use the model because we want
to necessarily represent the nucleus, we use the model
because we want to make inferences right about the that
we want to study, we want to understand how
DNA behaves, we want to understand how uh possible
error in the um in the in the process of
DNA uh uh chain of events may happen. So
we, we want to ask those questions about what
is possible about DNA replication and mistakes in the DNA
replication. So think of models really as catering to
this needs of allowing us to make uh uh relevant
and appropriate inferences about phenomena that we want to study
. So that's what the metaphor of inferential blueprint is
. So models yes, do represent and do represent
from a specific vantage point. That's why we have
a plurality of models used by different communities. The
primary function is not to ascribe essential properties to the
target system. As the metaphysicians would like us to
think of the primary function is to allow communities to
make reliable, robust, relevant and appropriate inferences about
those uh uh those phenomena that, that, that
we want to study. And so again, I
use the analogy very often as I do in the
book between um uh uh uh perspective of representation in
this case in architecture. So the idea of the
inferential blueprints is borrowed from, from architecture because again
, in, in, in, in architecture,
you can have uh um a plurality of perspective or
representation of say a house that allows different communities of
the carpenter and the masons and the architects to work
together and make inferences about how the house should be
built. How tall should the roof be? What's
the relationship between the height of the door and the
height of the roof. Uh And so I use
an analogy to say likewise, whenever we want to
study specific phenomenon, that plurality of models allows these
different communities to make those uh uh relevant and appropriate
inferences about the objects so that we want to study
. Um So they find in models as really catering
to um the need of delivering knowledge about what is
possible about the object under study. So, perspect
modeling is modeling possibilities, modeling, how things could
be. Um And it's, it's a way of
answering those questions in a kind of very exploratory way
where we have not just one community that can reclaim
full ownership of the knowledge of the target system,
but we need a plurality of communities that I illustrate
with various case studies in the book. So I
have one chapter on climate change. So climate modeling
in the context of studying um uh global warming,
one chapter on developmental psychology and one chapter on the
nuclear physics where I show how in each case to
study specific phenomena like the stability of some nuclear or
difficulties with reading or global warming. We need a
plurality of community. So if you want to study
climate change and global warming, you need a plurality
of people that model um increase in ocean heat temperature
uh communities that model how glacier and permafrost are changing
under the effect of greenhouse gasses. Communities that study
corals and uh uh tree rings. So then thema
again to make inferences from those data to the phenomena
under study. And so it's through that plurality of
modeling practices and, and communities that we come to
know very complex and multifactorial phenomena like um global warming
, for example. So that that's how I use
the analogy with models as inferential blueprint to explain our
models. Yes, represent, yes, represent from
a perspect point of view. But they do so
by effectively delivering knowledge about what is possible concerning the
object that we want to study. So earlier in
our conversation, you alluded to this. Uh But
what are they, what are phenomena and what is
the relationship between them through this framework of perspective of
realism? Yeah. So um going back to uh
exactly the question of what flavor of realism is basically
our realism, as I mentioned in the beginning,
it's really a realism about phenomena. But I,
one of the main task of the book was to
redefine what I mean by phenomenon. This phenomena come
from a long standing empi traditions that really stretches back
to, you know, pm 19 05, a
wonderful book on to save the phenomenon more recently,
wasn't to Pras and I mentioned already in 1980 scientific
image. Um that also defends the view that um
you know, the reality is reality made of phenomena
observable phenomena according to Tora. Um So it's very
difficult to say that I'm a realist about phenomena when
the very term phenomenon has been associated with uh a
long standing and pis tradition that is normally regarded phenomena
is not the sort of objects that one would have
real and commitment to. Um So what I do
in the second part of the book is trying to
um articulate the positive story and the positive story is
that um given this perspect of pluralism, uh where
models are embedded as part of the practices of different
communities, the inferences that we make are inferences to
what I call moly robust phenomena. So what are
moly robust phenomena? They're not the phenomena of the
fro and they're not the phenomenal of Pierre do m
they're not the phenomena of the Empire tradition as um
faint copies or faint images of a reality uh that
lies underneath the phenomenon that we need to discover uh
you know, appealing to the metaphysician tools or whatever
dispositional essences or because of powers uh phenomena of what
there is in a way I'm um borrowing from the
country and tradition, the idea that knowledge is knowledge
of phenomena, but those phenomena not in pieces,
phenomena more robust. And what I really mean by
more of robustness is that phenomena stable event. So
there's a kind of 22 tier ontology that I articulate
in chapter six of the book. So phenomena are
stable event index to a particular domain and they are
modally robust across a plurality of data to phenomena inferences
. So there are stable events in that, that
there is a level of reality that are called stable
event where stability is really synonymous with low likeness for
me. So um stable events are events that are
such not because they are core ones, but because
there are low like dependencies in in the fabric of
those events. So that explain why they are stable
. But the phenomenon is not just a stable event
. Uh The phenomenon is the outcome of an inference
made by communities from data understood broadly as empirical occurrences
. So to give an example that I um given
the book, um it is a stable event that
an electric charge is gonna be affected by an electric
or magnetic field. So there are low like dependencies
that explains how an electric charge is going to be
deflected by an external field, that's a stable event
in nature. But what we called um cathode ray
or the phenomenon of the bending of cathode rays is
the model robust phenomenon that uh was discovered by JJ
Thompson at the end of the 19th century using a
a particular tool that was a cato tube working in
a particular historically cap situated context. There was the
Victorian Cambridge of the end of the century. Um
And, and so the phenomenon is not a robust
because we can infer and Reiner um the same phenomenon
from different kind of data sets by slightly tweaking the
experimental conditions. Uh And and so forth. So
the model of robustness is some kind of secondary property
that is really a property of how different communities are
able to robustly infer the same phenomenon from a variety
of, of data. So that's broadly speaking,
the kind of phenomena for so that I I defend
in, in the book and with that in mind
, what are natural kinds and how do we go
from phenomena to kinds? So yeah, Um so
, one of the problem I had when I was
writing the book is that I was obviously committed to
defending this phenomenon for so, but I was also
very much aware that when it comes to realism,
um it's not enough to say that we live in
a world where there are moli robust phenomena, the
bending of the cat race, the decay of the
Higgs boson, the growth of the mycelium echolocation in
Beluga. Those are examples of what I call moli
robust phenomena, the pollination of flowers and so forth
that require inferences on behalf of communities to stable events
in nature. A realist wants uh something more than
phenomena. A realist want something about natural kinds.
So a realist would say, um I don't just
want to know what the bending of cadore is.
I want to know what the electron is. I
want to know what the nucleus is. I want
to know what genes are. I want to know
, you know um what lemon and zebras and supernovas
. Are so those are natural kinds. So those
are uh kinds of things. And um again,
realism very often has been associated with um number of
views about what national kinds are. Um ranging from
hacking. And no, to I mentioned already,
John Dupre promiscuous realism to varieties of uh uh um
microstructure and essentialism back to Hillary Patnam in the 19
seventies and so forth. Um So the story I
tell in the book about natural kinds, which really
a long one, it stands from chapter seven to
chapter 10 in the book is that natural kinds are
open ended grouping of historically identified phenomena. There is
nothing more, nothing over uh natural kinds than open
ended grouping of historical identified phenomena. And obviously,
the big challenge is OK, is this just a
form of conventional, is a natural kind, just
the label that we attach to grouping of phenomena.
So I had to go into um quite a lot
of details to clarify why the view is not a
conventional view. And it's not an essentialist view either
. Um But it's really a view that tries to
again bring in the inferential is so phenomena, the
outcome of inferences likewise natural kinds are the outcome of
inferences. Um Rob robust, reliable, still revis
still open ended, still very valuable inferences made by
plurality of communities over time. Um And so I'll
give a full definition, I give a full inferential
story uh about national kind. They are called natural
kinds with the human face. Borrowing from Hillary but
1990 book realism with a human face. Um What
I explain how those law like dependencies in the fabric
of the stable events provide effectively the um I I
if you like the the kind of pointers in this
walking in the garden of working path in whereby communities
can make uh choices about what to cluster or what
not to cluster into the natural kind. But to
do so reliably, they need to rely on low
like dependencies. They are part of the stable events
in nature. So the clustering is not arbitrary,
it is not conventional. And so there is an
element of contingencies, but it's not a rampant kind
of contingentism. It's, it's kind of constrained and
guided by um low like dependencies in nature. So
it's a long story from chapter seven to chapter 10
. And I give a full detail of that in
, in, in, in chapter 10 of the
book where I delve into the historical case studies about
the electron. And yeah, sorry. No,
no, no worries. Uh And another thing I
would like to ask you is at a certain point
in the book, you talk about contingentism. So
what is contingentism and how is it involved in perspective
of realism? So continent is, is associated precisely
with um with this point I was making about how
the um open ended grouping of phenomena um is to
some extent contingent in the sense that we could have
cluster different phenomena under the National Kind Electron, for
example, um now continent, this historically has been
a very powerful uh argument coming from the history of
science against a very strong um the physical form of
realism. Um um So, I don't know lots
of people that contributed to this debate from has Chang
to cons for them. Also Joseph Laporte. Um
so things could have gone otherwise, right? So
Joseph Laporte, in his book on Natural Con and
con change, tell us it is a beautiful story
of how, you know, we made a choice
at some point to include the dirty oxide into um
the natural kind water. But there was a choice
in a way that we made, we could have
, we could have gone otherwise. So that's the
element of contingentism. Uh I define a particular brand
of contingentism in the sense that um um um I'm
not that kind of full blown contingent is in the
sense that I don't think that things could have gone
entirely in a completely different way. Uh Precisely because
um the way I think a phenomena as a stable
event where stability is synonymous with low likeness means that
the inferences that communities make about what phenomena goes with
. What other phenomena are not fully at our discretion
, are not fully at our women in a way
we need to respond to the Tribunal of Nature as
a speaker, I find. So um There are
a lot like dependencies that really guides those inferences that
we make. Um So, uh uh and uh
and so I tell a story about how um every
natural kind is a kind in the making. Uh
some of those in the making kind become empty at
some point when we discovered that maybe there's some violation
of fundamental laws. Uh So we believed in caloric
, for example, back in the 19th century,
people believed that there was a substance called caloric that
was responsible for transitional state from ice to say water
to, to steam. Um But some of the
uh inferences that people made about what are the phenomena
that are captured by the Nashua Khan Caloric uh were
clearly inferences that very soon revealed their limits. So
um reveal their limits because very often they were appealing
to um features of the phenomena that were simply false
. So, Sadiq Karno was one of the um
key people in the uh formulation of the KO principles
and the car cycle. So Ko believed in caloric
back in the first half of the 19th century.
And he believed that there was a substance that was
uh uh physically conserved whenever a hot reservoir goes into
cold reservoir. And then a new cycle starts behind
like a steam engine. Uh but obviously, there
is no conserve calor and there is no conservation of
caloric and there is no perpetual motion machine and in
fact, can be created using that principle. So
this is where we face the tribunal of experience where
we can't say we could have had now in 2023
an Act kind caloric still alive. And well,
no, we couldn't have had that right, because
we soon stumbled into some problems about some of those
very phenomena that were identified, identified as the phenomenon
where caloric was, was at work. And uh
and the fact that there was no conservation of caloric
and if anything there was dissipation, which was then
captured by the concept of entropy and so forth revealed
the limits of those associations. So, so kind
of long winded answer to your question, the contingentism
means that although things could have gone otherwise in how
communities came to make inferences about phenomenon connection between phenomena
, things could not have gone entirely in a completely
different ways because in a way, there are those
constraints concerning low like dependencies of the phenomena that uh
really act as pointers in the garden of working path
about which inferences we decide to go down to and
which inferences we decide to abandon at some point.
I understand. So getting into the last part of
our interview, could you tell us now about multiculturalism
and cosmo cosmopolitanism? Science? I mean, uh
is science a multicultural and cosmopolitan enterprise? And what
role do these two things? Multiculturalism and cosmopolitan,
cosmopolitanism play in science? Yeah. No, thank
you. So this is the final chapter of the
book and it's um um I wanted to write that
chapter because um I, I thought the book was
going to be complete without a final discussion about what
really um questions about realism and perspective iss uh are
doing in, in this context. Um So very
often in the debate on realism, philosophers have appealed
to the aims of science. So it seems that
, you know, we care about discussion about realism
and the realism and truth and representation because we want
to fundamentally um answer questions about what is the goal
of science and what is the aim? Um And
I thought that perspective of realism was not really answering
that question about what the aim of goal of science
is. Uh what perspective of realism does is to
um offer a different lens for thinking about realism in
science, starting with this plurality of situated communities.
And once you take that step, the next step
is to think of questions about duties and obligations in
science and rights in science. So no questions,
aims and goals. But actually what is science for
who produces science? Who has to benefit from science
, who can reclaim as their own a right to
benefit from scientific knowledge. So the first chapter in
a way, try to answer those, those questions
which are kind of more um ethical political questions about
duties and obligations in science. So, multiculturalism and
cosmopolitanism are again huge terms with a very long and
often difficult and vexed history that I wanted to use
to um exactly explain they, they called the natural
perspective of realism. Though it's, there's a perspective
of pluralism that like there's multiculturalism, there's this plurality
of historically situated communities that over time produce reliable knowledge
about more robust phenomena. But also an invitation of
not thinking about that situated nature of knowledge as some
kind of silo where knowledge is produced by community in
isolation from other communities. Or you know, this
is the um kind of picture that we had again
from, you know, the the tradition of a
Thomas K on scientific paradigms where there is incommensurability.
Um There's a period of crisis and scientific revolution.
Uh And I, I wanted to offer a different
story where it was really an invitation of not to
think of scientific perspectives as siloed. Uh but to
think of those communities and their interaction in terms of
what I call intersecting and interlacing scientific perspectives, perspectives
that over time, not only methodological intersect to allow
us to make more reliable inferences about the phenomenon that
we want to study. But also over time,
historically interlace like the um like in a fabric,
like in a piece of cloth where you have the
different threads that are historically interlaced uh to produce knowledge
that effectively is knowledge that we can reclaim as,
as, as knowledge that belong to all of us
. And obviously that open up also the question questions
about when is the interlacing virtues? When is the
interlacing going badly wrong? Because there are exploitative practices
or epistemic injustices in the way in which some communities
appropriate other communities types of knowledge. So whose knowledge
is it? Who, who can be uh uh
uh attributed authorship of particular uh knowledge claims? So
those are all very big questions that I try to
simply really map out in the final chapter and I
hope to get back to. But the idea is
that starting with this perspective of pluralism and multiculturalism,
we can articulate a picture about scientific knowledge as reliable
knowledge uh that has to address important epistemic injustice about
what I call the severing and trademarking of knowledge.
And at the same time, has to result in
a broader picture of how knowledge is really knowledge produced
by uh uh by humankind for humankind. So that
no one should be excluded from benefiting from it and
benefiting from the advances of scientific knowledge. So it
kind of branches out into debates about the uh right
to science as a uh as a right that is
enshrined in the UN Declaration of Human rights. So
everyone is uh should benefit from um scientific progress and
scientific advancement, but it's obviously not what happens in
practice. The scientific knowledge continues to be privatized,
continues to be in the hands of um few wealthy
countries. So um as I said it as a
final chapter that um I hope to get back to
in terms of my present and future work. But
it kind of shows the broader um um kind of
social political dimensions in which discussions about pluralism and perspective
is and realism play out. And so my final
question for today will be, is science really about
producing objective knowledge or knowing what objective reality is?
Yes, is the answer in so far as we
are clear about what we mean by objective reality,
right? So uh if objective reality means that there
is one way and one way only to uh carving
natural disjoint, I mean, that's not what perspective
of realism would subscribe to. Uh but by objective
reality, we mean that there is a world of
stable events, Koli events uh to which our uh
multifarious inferential practices have to respond. That's, that's
objective enough. And so, yes, scientific knowledge
, knowledge of objective reality within the bounds of uh
the historical and cultural situated practices that we have,
we don't have any God's eye view, we don't
have any view from nowhere. But that doesn't mean
that what we have is just um a fragmented landscape
of isolated communities. What we have is a fairly
remarkable uh knowledge produced over time by different communities.
And I think it's something that uh I wanted to
celebrate in, in, in the book. And
uh as I said, it kind of opens up
broader questions about um who produces knowledge and who should
benefit from knowledge that is entangled in my mind with
these questions about objective reality. Mhm. Great.
So uh I'm leaving a link to the book in
the description box of the interview, which is again
, perspective of realism. Uh Doctor Massimi, just
before we go, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on the
internet? Um So I have my website which is
www dot mila mastery dot com. So, um
uh um that's where my um articles and books and
activities and projects normally are, are posted. Mhm
. Yeah. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk to you. My
pleasure. Thank you so much for having me.
Hi guys. Thank you so much for watching the
interview until the end. Please share it, leave
a like comment and hit the subscription button and if
you like what I'm doing and to keep the channel
sustainable, please consider supporting it on Patreon or paypal
even just$1 per month is already a great help
. The show is brought to you by N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check their website at
N lights dot com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters bugger Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
, Bernard, Se Z OLA AEX, Adam,
Castle Matthew Whittenberg, Arno Wolf, Tim Hoy,
Eric, Alan John Connors Philip for Connolly. Then
the Mere Robert Wine in NAI Z Mar Nevs Colin
Ha Simon Columbus, Phil Kavanagh, Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre Francis for the nuns feral Ken Hal Herzog
. Nun Jonathan lebron Jars and Samuel Correa Eric Heinz
Marc Smith J Tom Hamel S Friends, David Sloan
Wilson, Yasa, Desario, Roman Roach Diego,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barbaro, Adam hunt Palos stas
Sy Nale Bach Guy Madison, Gary Gelman, Samo
Zal Adrian Yi Paul Tolentino JB was Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Brunner, Douglas Fry Franco Bertolotti,
Gabriel Pan Cortez Orli Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy
, Sunny Smith, John Wiesman, Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Lo A Georges
, the Chris Williams and Peter Woz. David Williams
the Costa Anton Erickson Charles More Aex Shaw, Amari
, Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, bangalore atheists, Larry
D Lee Junior Old Aring B Starry Michael Bailey.
Then Spur Robert Grassy. Zorin Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas. Radis Mark Campbell Thomas Dubner, Luke
Neeson, Chris story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man. George Coryat is Valentin Steinman, Per
Rowley Kate Von Goler, Alexander Hubbard, Liam Dunaway
Biard Masoud Ali Mohammadi and Perpendicular. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stefi Thomas Tom Ween, Bernard Nic Ortiz Dixon Benedict
Mueller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlo
Montenegro, Al Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Riano Bogdan
Knits and Vege G. Thank you for all.